---
layout: page
title: "Oh, my beloved exams"
draft: true
permalink: /blog/drafts/dac9630aec642a428cd73
excerpt: >
  A rant about exams & competition. Not scientifically grounded, but unlike exams: human.
---

Ah, how I cherish them... exams. Every semester ends with multiple of those atrocious stress-level-raising 90 minutes where you "show what you have learned". As if it was that easy to define and measure what one "knows" about a complex subject.

## Exams test more than the subject

What I'm being tested at in exams is not only the subject at hand. It also includes a _probabilistic_ component: how well do I feel during that specific day both physically and mentally? Maybe I have a slight cold. Maybe a girl is on her period. Maybe the exam is taking place too early for me to get into a productive flow state. Maybe it is scheduled during my tiredest time of the day. Maybe the lighting conditions in the room are subpar or the air quality leaves much to be desired.

Exams are also about how well I fit into a system: **how well can I concentrate during a specific, short period of time**, without being distracted by the fact that 200 people are in the same room? And **how quickly can I think**? I'm definitely not the fastest: I rather prefer taking my time in the absolute quiet. Thinking through one equation for one hour (or a lot more), making sure I really know where it is derived from, what its context is, what the boundary conditions are, what space this variable even lives in, and what the formula is useful for. In an overpaced world, I find joy in investing time to deeply understand a topic, and maybe draw connections to other things I've learned about and simply mess around with things and engage with the content in a playful, happy-go-lucky attitude.

I doubt major scientific results are conceived and written down in 90 minutes. Sometimes it takes centuries, brilliant minds and a diversity of cultures to find a solution to an old problem, especially in math. But of course, exams don't require you to win the nobel price and are designed to be finishable in the proposed timeframe, you might retort. Well, yes (in case you fit into the system), but at the cost of exercises that don't actually have much to do with what would be really meaningful to know about if you wanted to pursue your studies in this area or work in a research team afterwards.

Instead, you are requested to painstakingly apply an algorithm like Gaussian elimination, memorized by heart, when writing a simple 10-line Python program would spare you to go through each annoying and mostly uninstructive calculation by hand. It is of course vital to to understand how Gaussian elimination works. And it's no harm carrying it out a few times by hand on paper to grasp the algorithm. But then, I don't see the use of reiterating it for new numbers. This is a very specific example, but think about how many exam exercises just require you to apply an algorithm (like Hund's rule) or to plug numbers into a formula and your calculator.


## "Learn for life"

Furthermore, exams come with the ugly side-effect of reinforcing human laziness in a rather sad way: although teachers always emphasize they want us to "learn for life", in the end, you still have to pass the exam. And probably want to get a good grade too in this competitive society. So you still have to learn _for the exam_. The subject becomes a means to an end. A mentality that even spreads to teachers telling you what is or what is not relevant for the test. There is even a proper German word for this, "klausurrelevant", and I'm mildly allergic to it.

Learning _for_ the exam also means preparing for the oftentimes far-fetched questions by optimizing your pattern recognition to quickly identify them and write down the answer you remembered (or have noted on your legal cheat sheet) from one of the acquired exams from past years, from which many questions will be recycled. Which is why there is often secrecy surrounding these old exams and why professors don't want to hand them out (again, it reinforces human laziness). But when it comes down to it: overfitted models are of no use for anybody. That is not to say that there are certainly very smart people who also excel in exams without overfitting the training data (past exams). My point is rather that the set of smart students and that of students who excel in exams, does not at all have to coincide. Not performing well in an exam does not at all mean you're stupid, learned nothing about the subject, or that you are a "bad person".

## Competition

This brings us to another effect (or rather origin?) of exams: competition. **It's all about measuring human performance. But the method doesn't sound too human after all.** It attempts to describe your humanness in a measly number: a grade. Thereby, it crates a narrative of "better" and "worse". Even though nobody might come to you and say "look how great I am with my 1.0", you might still feel of not equal value by your self-imposed thoughts dictated by society.

Not to say that a bit of competition can actually foster a growth mindset and also be fun. Ultimately, science is about pushing forward, to unknown lands that wouldn't have been deemed within reach yesterday. And maybe, the initial spark to get the ball rolling is the vision of achieving better results than this other research group, or even selfishly, of getting more recognition as person and scientist. But even though this is also comparative thinking, you are in a different position as scientist working in a research group than a student in their second Bachelor's semester: you actually work on a scientific problem and there is obviously more than just achieving better performance on one specific question that can validate you and give you a feeling of actually contributing something.

But the student only sees the grades as direct outcome. Competition might push you to achieve "better" results, but it bears the high risk of destabilizing talented souls by forcing upon them (from early on) a binary mindset of "good grades = success", "bad grades = failure". I mean, we even say "to _fail_ an exam". This creates pressure that can lead to psychosomatic symptoms, if not depression.

Exams may be a good incentive to work towards a goal for some. I also like deadlines (even just my owns) to get the ball rolling. But for me at least, exams create a more tense and thus less enjoyable learning atmosphere, always with that nagging feeling that you might be blocking your future if you don't pass. I'd much rather live in a world where we learn for the sake of learning: because we're enthusiastic about a subject, because we are actually interested in it, not just the exam.

## Why exams?

We have to ask ourselves if exams are really a good way to measure human performance. Maybe we should go further and challenge the concept of "human performance" in and of itself. What is the goal of exams and grades in the first place? To provide a way to classify and rank people during applications? Is it clear that somebody who didn't achieve a 1.0 in their A levels cannot be a good medic? What does a single number, even if averaged over multiple grades, really tell about a human, their past, and their know-how in a certain field? Some foundations strictly require that you to be among the 10% of students in your degree in order to even apply. I just hope that companies realize that there is more than grades. And what about academia? The reality is that with a 2.x master, you will likely encounter significantly more difficulties than someone who graduated with a grade of 1 before the decimal point.

The whole machinery and cultural burden around exams profoundly disappoints me. As best I can, I have learned to live and deal with it, trying to take grades not that seriously anymore and putting more emphasis on learning for the beauty and joy of it. But of course, this is difficult when, despite teachers regurgitating how important it is to "learn for life", grades still dictate what waters one can venture into later on. Nobody wants to blow their chances, so grades remain important.

I hope recruiters, be it in a company, or as PI of a research group, will not only put their focus on grades, but approach the person with dignity as human being, worth way more than what a single number could ever express. Personal projects, the eagerness to grow, soft skills, and side quests into topics beyond exams should also be valued, if not more, in my opinion. I'd love to see more alternative methods of examination like 3-week deep-dive reports. But maybe we should also question the concept of "grades" and ask ourselves if they are not a remnant of darker times worth getting rid of in favor of a more relaxed, joyful and playful learning atmosphere fostering a sense of team spirit (while allowing for competition-like aspects), responsibility and real excitement for the subject at hand. I cannot provide a solution to reform the system here, but we should definitely reconsider the purpose and effectiveness of grades.
